The idea was that I ought to have some input to the person that's going to write their annual evaluation.
And I called each of the services and I did quickly get approval for them.
from each service for me to make a written input that the rater could use or not use.
But it's something we used to do, a letter of evaluation in the Air Force.
If you weren't entitled to a full evaluation, you went over and worked for a person for six weeks or two months and did a special job, it didn't qualify for a full rating.
But it would qualify for one of these letters of evaluation.
So it would go into the file.
So it gave me a little bit of leverage there.
And leverage may not be the right word.
Influence.
But it was a situation that's still troublesome, I believe, today.
As you arrived...
as far as you were aware at that time, describe the Corps of Cadets, the number, the quality, the variety, and so forth.
When I arrived in 87, the recruiting had essentially been done for the year.
That was the last year of enrollment management, as I recall, at A&M.
We had the largest fish class in the United States
Texas A&M did.
I remember freshman students going around with these t-shirts on the largest fish class in the nation or something to that effect.
I think we had about 8,800 freshmen that fall.
The Corps benefited from that large freshman enrollment.
And our total enrollment was between 23 and 2400 that fall.
I believe it has not been that large since then.
We came close on one or two years, but it has not been that large since 1987.
Of course, enrollment management has changed things up there and limited the freshman enrollment somewhat lower than what we knew then.
I met a lot of freshmen that fall, you know, just going around trying to get to know some of them, observing them, and I'd always ask each one I met, well, you know, what are you going to study?
Well, I'm an aeronautical engineer.
And I couldn't believe how many people told me they were engineers, and particularly aeronautical engineers.
Later, I discovered that about 50% of the freshman class in the Corps were engineers.
And it had been that way for a while, predominantly engineering.
A lot of them changed and dropped out of engineering, you know, within a year or two, but still a pretty high percent of engineers.
The kids came from all across, again, but it seemed like a lot more from the bigger cities.
Certain feeder schools seemed to be predominant.
Plano area was one that stuck out, I thought.
What about women and minorities?
We had a small number of women in the Corps.
I'm going to estimate 60 total, something like 50, 60 at the most.
minorities, a few African-Americans, a good many Hispanics.
Later on I started tracking all this.
There was no tracking mechanism on that.
No one asked me a thing about that or said anything, but it was not till later that we really got interested in those numbers.
The cadets seemed pretty
high-spirited students, enjoyed the fun and games, and I was impressed especially by some of the commanders.
Did you think these students compared well with what you thought you and your buddies were 30 years earlier?
Oh, I think so.
I think in a lot of ways I thought they were better qualified than what I remembered we were back in my days.
But they were good students, but there were some of them that struggled.
Some of them came in with pretty low SATs and not the greatest records.
Some of those struggled, but I saw cases where some of those people did very well too.
I think shows that, you know, it depends on your effort and some other things sometimes, not just your SAT.
As a new CO, commanding officer, I'm assuming that you had, at least privately, that you had a strategy plan.
What was your plan for your role as Commandant?
Let me back up a little bit again.
In our discussion for coming here and right as I came, a lot of interest on hazing.
In fact, the local Brian paper had contacted me at Norfolk and wanted to know what I thought about the new state hazing law.
How was I going to implement that and on and on.
And I didn't know what the situation was.
I hadn't seen this.
They just told me about it.
You know, the degree of hazing and problems we had in the Corps, I didn't know.
I didn't have that background.
So that leads me into what I'm about to say.
My initial strategy was to do a lot of listening and watching.
And John Colas had kind of told me, why don't you take about a year and size things up?
see what you think of all this.
You know, change is not easy.
And, you know, we want you to come in and do an evaluation of everything and then you start doing the things.
So my first year was pretty much to follow the party line, listen to my staff, do the things, let them introduce me to all of these things.
I would try to get to know the students and see what's going on, and then we'll go from there.
But my first year was pretty much to continue what was in place, but to start thinking about what new direction I wanted to bring to the Corps.
And you're inferring then that there were no fires that had to be put out immediately, no immediate crises.
That they told you you had to deal with on day one.
The only thing that really was sort of put to me was this hazing law.
You know, you're going to have to figure out what this thing means and what do we do about it.
You know, that was something that I had to deal with.
There was another thing that happened shortly after, well, two or three things happened shortly after I came here.
One, I learned about a previous bonfire incident.
Malin and his briefing of me, he took about 10 days to brief me on a bunch of things and what was going on and what they'd been involved in, the major problems as he saw them.
women working at the bonfire.
They had this incident the previous year that he dealt with all year.
This one female cadet was up on a barrel
playing the scarecrow or something, and some of the guys thought she's not supposed to be there, and it resulted in an incident and an investigation that had been a burr on his back all year, I believe, and that was just being settled when I came here, but they told me about it.
Well, within two weeks or so after I moved into the Commandant's seat there, I started getting calls from alumni and prominent people,
telling me that the discipline system was a mess.
That these four cadets, I believe, were being expelled from school because of a simple little prank, birthday prank.
And that, you know, what am I going to do about that?
I need to get in involved and get this straightened out.
I said, I don't even know what incident you're talking about.
It's all new to me.
Well, it was a yell leader and I think three of his buddies, the yell leader, senior yell leader-to-be, they were living over in the quad area during the summer and it was his birthday and they had quatted him.
That term was a new one to me.
I didn't know what they were talking about.
I don't ever heard of quadding in my day, but apparently they stick his head in a commode and flush it, stick the top of his head down in there some way.
Another time it's used is when people drop water bombs out of windows on people's heads and stuff like that.
But it was some kind of quadding that he was involved in.
And in accordance with the new hazing law, they had been, as I recall, expelled or suspended from school.
And the alumni that were calling me were irate that
they would have been dismissed for a traditional corps prank and demanded that I get myself involved.
It really wasn't in my jurisdiction.
Because it was summer school, the corps wasn't in session.
It was handled by Dr. Brent Patterson's group over in Student Services.
And they made the call there, as I recall.
And I think it was
their sense of the new hazing law that any little thing like that would not be tolerated.
So we did have that to deal with, but again, I didn't deal with it directly.
It wasn't under my jurisdiction, but people were coming to me and saying, you know, you need to be involved.
Who are these folks over here making these decisions about a cadet?
You're the commandant.
You know, you ought to be responsible for this.
You're around.
I started opening my eyes to all this stuff saying, hey, this is not what I came here expecting.
Another little associated comment, that August graduation and commissioning ceremony, General Ormond Simpson gave the little commissioning speech that day and commissioned the people since I was so brand new.
But Ormond stood there in his white uniform and all did a great job.
As you recall, they have those little luncheons after graduation, especially on Friday night and Saturday noon.
My wife and I were invited to the luncheon, and we're sitting there.
We have assigned seats.
And they say, oh, General and Mrs. Darley, you all sit right here.
I didn't know who most of these people were, but it turned out Royce Weisenbaker was on one side of me, and Joe Reynolds was on the other side.
And we had quite a conversation during lunch.
And they were both regents at that point.
Both regents.
I'd heard about them, but I don't think I'd met either one of them.
Didn't know a great deal about them other than that they were regents.
And I knew Mr. Weisenbaker was an oil man.
Reynolds was a lawyer.
But we had a nice conversation.
Reynolds told me that he was from Baylor, I believe.
He was really a Baylor grad, but he had a great love for A&M.
He'd been in Marine Corps and all that.
But it didn't take us long before they kind of zeroed in on me to tell me, you're here to be in charge of discipline for the court.
We want you to be in charge.
Don't let anybody tell you you're not.
Well, I couldn't believe
that I had received such a direct charge from them.
But I knew that, you know, there are regents over here.
They're not here in the operating mode every day.
So you know what they're telling me, how does that translate into directions from John Koldis or President Vandiver?
So I was a little troubled by all that.
I did talk to John some about that.
And we considered that off and on for a year, and eventually he did send me a little short paragraph saying I was in charge of this one for the Corps.
But that didn't last too long.
Administrations changed, and it's in there somewhere.
I forget exactly when this happened.
But within a year or so after I came here, I was given full authority over the Corps to expel, dismiss, and all of that.
I told John that if you're going to give me that authority, I think there needs to be some appeal system where students can appeal to some other authority.
And that was part of the system, as I recall.
We operated that way for a little while, but there were a lot of folks on campus
started saying, hey, this is not right, you know, you need to treat all these.
Well, we had some problems.
Jackie Sherrill had some problems with athletes before then where they were kind of handled over on the side and some feeling that they got special treatment.
RC had taken over and he'd given disciplinary authority back to the university in a sense.
And John explained to me that, you know, I think really the Corps ought to be just like everybody else.
We have the same disciplinary system.
But back to Mr. Wisebaker and Joe Reynolds talking to me, they assisted the military's different
You need somebody with military background who can understand all this to make all these decisions.
But anyway, it was a great controversy and… Did they infer they were speaking for the board or were they speaking for themselves as individuals?
It wasn't clear, but I gathered that it was a consensus of the board.
Obviously, they had talked some about a commandant coming and all of that.
I don't know if they were in the approval process or not, but they seemed very interested in all of this.
And let me know, you know, they were supportive of the Corps.
We wanted to be strong.
You know, it's the backbone of the university.
You know, this is a bold step for the university now to bring in its own commandant.
and have a general officer here, and you're it, and you're in charge.
They were very supportive, and Doug DeCluet was one of those regents, and Doug headed this committee, a subcommittee of the regents that was to provide some oversight support for the Corps, interest in the Corps.
They were to have, that was in their area of purview, I guess, and Doug met me shortly after that and told me that he wanted me to come to the
Regents meetings, and he periodically asked me to make a report to the Regents.
And he did.
And I could, from the first time I went there, I could tell
To a person, they were very supportive and wanted the court to prosper and do well, very interested.
They wanted the court to have what it needed.
They wanted me to make the changes that needed to be made, but on the other hand, I'm sure they wouldn't have suggested some things that I might have in mind.
Were there other regents and or President Vandiver or other former students that gave you advice early on, either solicited or unsolicited advice?
Well, there were other regents.
I used to know those all very well.
John Mobley was one of them from Austin.
Lowry Mays, very supportive.
Early on, did you get any calls?
say at home or middle of the night or suddenly where some regent or some former student called to try to give you advice or to ask for special help to a certain student?
I got a lot of those.
Some of them I wouldn't name probably at this point, but on the other hand, I don't know that there's any that I couldn't name that I can recall.
Back up a little bit, something we were talking about a moment ago on this discipline with those kids that were involved with the quieting.
There were some parents that led an effort to change my position, my reporting responsibility, directly to the president.
They were very, this discipline, the handling of that case is what started this.
And there's a fellow from over around Austin started calling me.
I didn't know him.
Had a son in the Corps.
And he felt it was all wrong for me to be reporting to student services, that my responsibility was such that
You need to be under the president.
You know, the Corps is not going to get the resources it needs and all, and you're not going to have the authority and control that you need unless you report directly to the president.
I really felt uncomfortable with that.
And he got others backing it.
In fact, one of the football games, they were passing out flyers to the crowd coming in to support this idea that the commandant should report to the president.
Well, I didn't know what to do about all that.
I did talk to John a little bit.
He'd heard a little about it, and he wasn't pleased with that at all, and I can understand.
And did they understand that you had no part in encouraging this?
They knew that that was their idea.
But, you know, they'd call me up and say, this is the way it ought to be.
I was mostly in the listening mode at that time.
I didn't know the impact of all of this and didn't have it all figured out.
I thought, well, in some ways that might be nice, but I can't believe the president, you know, is looking for someone else to report on him.
How would it work?
And I thought a lot about that.
uh...
Where does the commandant, to whom does he report?
And early on I detected that we were quite different to all the other departments in Student Services.
We were kind of a daily operating command versus a planning group or some of the departments don't have the daily hectic operation to oversee like the Corps.
So I saw it somewhat different to some of the other organizations like
the health center and student counseling and some of the other groups.
It didn't seem exactly parallel.
But I didn't know what to make of all of that.
But I, frankly, was a little dismayed by all of these efforts to do that.
It was sort of embarrassing to me and put me in a very awkward spot, I thought.
How did all that come to a conclusion?
It kind of just fizzled out.
There was no, they couldn't really,
gain enough momentum to make any headway on that.
I think, you know, John Colas or Dr. Vandiver never seriously considered that, I don't believe.
Now Dr. Vandiver did give me, early on I met with him, and he did give me some
directions, some ideas that he thought we ought to pursue.
And some of them were a little complicated.
I never could quite figure all of them out.
I didn't know the full meaning of all of them.
And his assistant, Art Blair, I don't know if you remember Art.
Art was a former English professor at the Military Academy, been there 15 years or something.
But he was a retired Army colonel, but he had hooked up with Dr. Vandenberg,
And he was really his right-hand man.
Art did a lot of work for Dr. Vandiver.
and being a retired colonel from the academy and he was the, briefly, he was the superintendent or the, no, he was the commandant at the Citadel.
So he'd had some experience in the job that I'm in and, you know, he had some advice and things to offer me, which I was glad to receive.
So I visited a lot with Art Blair.
I used to go on the side and sit down and we'd visit.
He'd invite me to come over.
But Art Blair, as I recall, developed kind of a series of thoughts and things that Dr. Vanderwood would like the commandant to pursue, and he gave those to me.
Some of them looked almost impossible to me.
I can't even remember the details of them, but I just remember they were
rather complex and subject to interpretation what all that meant.
But I think Dr. Vannevar felt, you know, the Corps needed some major changes.
It needed an overhaul.
And, you know, he wanted me to
to do some of that, but Dr. Vandiver left after about one year, as I recall.
So my time under him was rather limited.
Right, now he's replaced by Bill Mobley?
Well, Dean Gage, I believe.
Oh, Dean Gage.
See, I believe Dean Gage.
No, let's see.
No, Bill Mobley.
Bill Mobley came in.
Gage replaced Mobley.
Was there much of a change as far as you were concerned in going from Vandiver to Mobley?
Good deal.
I found...
Mobley, Dr. Mobley was very interested in the Corps.
He recognized the strong support the Regents had for the Corps.
He felt, I believe, a strong need to pay some attention to the Corps, to lend his support and all.
I remember after Dr. Mobley was named president, he was working down in the old system of the Williams Building now.
His office was down there and
He called me up and before he ever moved into the president's chair and says, Tom, I'd like you to come down like tomorrow afternoon and sit down and visit with me a while.
I want to talk about the Corps and find out more about what are the current hot buttons in the Corps.
I thought that was kind of interesting that Bill Mobley called me down very quickly after he was appointed, named president, before he assumed the position to try to get a reading on the Corps.
And I found him a very warm, friendly person, very supportive, wanting to do all he could.
But I think, you know, he also read the Regents.
I just can't emphasize enough how much the Regents were behind the Corps and gave me their total support.
and wanted to do more to help.
But Dr. Mobley was a very outgoing fellow that was a very popular man with everyone.
His wife was very popular.
I detected over his time that that tailed off.
He had a lot of problems to deal with during his time and, you know, he had to tell a number of people no on things and
And pretty soon you run out of popular support, I guess.
I think in any position that's out to happen, especially in a job like that.
But he would call me up sometimes.
The faculty senate, this is one I'd like to get into again in a moment here, my relationship with the faculty senate and what I did there.
But he seemed to have some reservations about the direction the faculty senate was going.
And he called me up a time or two to have conversation and talk particular issues and all before a meeting or something.
I thought it was rather unusual that I would get a call directly from the president like that.
But he did that on more than one occasion.
But he was very supportive of the Corps.
He'd come to things and, you know, he played the role very well.
I think early on he seemed pretty comfortable in the job.
But again,
I think his support and all kind of tailed down on the end there.
And he had so many tough issues to deal with and it was unfortunate in my opinion.
When you first began your service here as Commandant, how did you get introduced to the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps in terms of what was your relations with those branches of the service?
Did you have any official relationship as Commandant with those?
I don't know that I had any official connection with them.
I knew people in each of those services, some of them the senior people that I had made while I was on active duty.
So those relationships helped me for a while.
You know, the more I was in the job, the more removed I became from the active service.
But it was a rather informal connection I had with the services.
Right.
Of those four services, was there any difference in the Corps' relations, obligations, commitments to
Was it any different for you that in dealing with a Corps member who was going into Army and Air Force or Marine Corps or Navy?
Not really.
I thought about that.
You know, you got to wear one of the uniforms.
So I was Air Force.
So, you know, are the Air Force people going to get a break?
Are they going to get the good deals because it's an Air Force guy?
I determined in my own mind that I was not going to be in any way impartial or show any favoritism.
In fact, if anything, I tried to be tougher on the Air Force people.
because of my own service affiliation.
But I tried to ignore that.
I tried to pretend
I'm in a purple suit here, meaning it's joint, it's all the same.
And I didn't have any problems with that at all.
I tried to promote the services the best I could.
And when I came here, the Air Force was clearly the premier ROTC program.
Had been for a number of years.
Had the largest program, easiest to recruit.
They didn't have...
The ROTCs didn't do a very good job of recruiting, in my opinion.
The Corps did most of the recruiting.
And the services benefited from that.
But the Air Force was very popular through that period.
Was that nationally?
Nationally.
The Air Force always could meet its recruiting goals and all essentially high school graduates were enlisted and college people.
But for many years they had been way out front in recruiting, disciplinary problems on active duty far less than the Air Force.
You know, AWOLs, desertions, crimes, all of those things.
The Air Force had always enjoyed statistics far superior to the other services.
What was at the other end of the spectrum?
Well, the Marine Corps had not been great in some statistics, but it's the mission of the service that drives a lot of this, I've come to conclude.
The Army is one that lives out in the field and crawls on their belly and stays in tents and all that.
The Air Force generally is known for having good quarters.
cushy jobs, some would say.
And so, you know, part of that is the attraction.
The Air Force has always been a very technical service and has attracted some of the most skilled people where the Marine Corps needs the riflemen out there.
That's the primary point of their
their services to put these guys, this team out there and the Army too to a great extent.
But the Army program was pretty flat when I came here and I'm told that
you know, that had been neglected a little bit.
I don't know too much about all that.
I wasn't here, so I can't say a whole lot, but I know that their numbers were not as good as we had hoped they would be or expected.
The Navy program was still a fairly new program in terms of, in comparison to the Army and the Air Force.
And it struck me as a little strange that there was always a Marine program
colonel that headed the Naval ROTC program.
And I learned from General Simpson that he was instrumental in getting that program established and he wrote it in the rules that the PNS would always be a marine colonel.
He and Olin Teague, Tiger Teague, helped to get that going to broaden so that A&M could have all the services.
How did you all recruit corps members in those days?
When I came here, Buck Henderson was the unofficial recruiting officer.
It was an additional duty, I would say, for Buck.
He had other responsibilities, but recruiting consisted mainly of having parents and students stop in the office of the commandant, and Buck would give them a little short briefing and talk to them about it.
We had some old flyers that had been around a while.
Had one brochure, I think it was, say a flyer, a brochure called Rise and Shine.
Been around here for years.
At the new student conferences.